Draft: Practical Zephyr part 1 "Series start and Zephyr basics" (#406)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/practical_zephyr_00_basics.md

## Installation

Let's get started - with a shortcut. Installation and toolchain management is - and probably always will be - a very biased topic. This article series is not about solving that problem. Therefore, I'm deliberately choosing a shortcut: We'll download "all things Zephyr" using Nordic's [toolchain manager](https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/nrf/installation/assistant.html#install-toolchain-manager) instead of following the complete installation procedure. This is not required, but convenient.

Instead of using Nordic's full-blown IDE solution, however, we'll create our own shell script that sets up our terminal. This demonstrates some of the environment variables used by Zephyr and allows you to use a plain terminal to follow along.

> **Note:** In case you want a "Zephyr only" installation without downloading Nordic's software, feel free to follow the installation procedure in the [official documentation](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/getting_started/index.html) - and I'll meet you again in the [next section](#creating-an-empty-application-skeleton)!

> As mentioned in the introduction, later in this series we'll see a much better approach where we don't need Zephyr's sources to be installed at all: The only thing you'll need are the host tools documented in Zephyr's [getting started guide](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/getting_started/index.html#install-dependencies). For now, I'm using Nordic's toolchain installer simply to have a running setup that we can use to explore Zephyr's sources and tools.

Author: Yep, definitely!

Once those environment variables are set, we can source the `zephyr-env.sh` that is provided by Zephyr itself, as shown below. This [Zephyr environment script](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/env_vars.html#zephyr-environment-scripts) is the recommended way to load an environment in case Zephyr is not installed globally.

```sh
# continuing setup.sh from the previous snippet
export ZEPHYR_TOOLCHAIN_VARIANT=zephyr
export ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR=$ncs_install_dir/toolchains/$ncs_bin_version/opt/zephyr-sdk
source $ncs_install_dir/$ncs_sdk_version/zephyr/zephyr-env.sh
west zephyr-export
```

Instead of setting `ZEPHYR_BASE` manually as, e.g., done by the `env.sh` script generated via the Nordic toolchain manager, `ZEPHYR_BASE` is now set by the `zephyr-env.sh` script (we'll see how `ZEPHYR_BASE` is used when building our application). In addition, this also allows [using `.zephyrrc` files](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/env_vars.html#option-3-using-zephyrrc-files) in your application root directory - a feature we won't cover in this series.

> The final command, `west zephyr-export`, is a ["Zephyr extension command"](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/west/zephyr-cmds.html#installing-cmake-packages-west-zephyr-export) that installs the required _CMake_ packages that we'll need in the next steps when using `find_package` to locate Zephyr's sources in a `CMakeLists.txt` file.

Reviewer: It might be good to note that this does not need to be run every time we source `setup.sh`

Author: `west zephyr-export` is actually part of this `setup.sh`, so it is run by that shell script each time we source it. Technically, it might not be necessary.

Reviewer: Yep, understood. I'm fine leaving as is. Thanks!

> That's it for the environment, we can now go ahead and create applications. One last time I'd like to emphasize that this was just a warm-up to get started with Zephyr. It is not required or recommended to use such a `setup.sh` script, it's just many of the possibilities you have when bringing up your development environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it for the environment, we can now go ahead and create applications. One last time I'd like to emphasize that this was just a warm-up to get started with Zephyr. It is not required or recommended to use such a `setup.sh` script, it's just one of many possibilities you have when bringing up your development environment.
```

## Creating an empty application skeleton

Now that we have a working installation, we can start with the important parts of this article series. Before creating our first files, let's review Zephyr's supported application _types_.

### Zephyr application types

> Zephyr supports different [application types](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/application/index.html#application-types), differentiated essentially depending on the location of your application in relation to Zephyr's sources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Zephyr supports different [application types](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/application/index.html#application-types), differentiated by the location of your application in relation to Zephyr's sources:
```

- [Zephyr repository applications](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/application/index.html#zephyr-repo-app) live within the Zephyr repository itself, e.g., demo applications that are maintained with Zephyr. You could add applications in a fork of the Zephyr repository, but this is not very common.

The most common and easiest approach is to **start** with a freestanding application: You'll only need a couple of files to get started. As with the nRF Connect SDK, Zephyr is located in a known installation directory that is configured via the environment.

> In more advanced projects you typically want to have all dependencies in your workspace and will therefore switch to a workspace application type: External dependencies will be cloned directly into your project by _West_ to avoid dependencies to local installations. We'll get to that at the end of this article series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In more advanced projects you typically want to have all dependencies in your workspace and will therefore switch to a workspace application type: External dependencies will be cloned directly into your project by _West_ to avoid depending on separate local installations. We'll get to that at the end of this article series.
```

`.vscode/launch.json`
```json
{
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "configurations": [
    {
      "name": "nRF52840_xxAA - attach",
      "device": "nRF52840_xxAA",
      "cwd": "${workspaceFolder}",
      "executable": "build/zephyr/zephyr.elf",
      "request": "launch",
      "type": "cortex-debug",
      "runToEntryPoint": "main",
      "servertype": "jlink",
      "gdbPath": "/opt/nordic/ncs/toolchains/4ef6631da0/opt/zephyr-sdk/arm-zephyr-eabi/bin/arm-zephyr-eabi-gdb"
    }
  ]
}
```

> **Note:** Support for GDB comes out of the box with `vscode` and could also be used instead of relying on `cortex-debug`. Also, in case you're sourcing `setup.sh` before launching `vscode`, you can use the environment variable for the `gdbPath` setting, e.g., `"gdbPath": "${env:ZEPHYR_SDK_INSTALL_DIR}/arm-zephyr-eabi/bin/arm-zephyr-eabi-gdb"`

![]({% img_url practical-zephyr/vscode-debug.png %})

> Your mileage, however, will always vary according to the MCU that you're using, and there is no generic solution. Zephyr's official documentation also comes with a dedicated [section about debugging](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/debug/index.html), and a separate section about [flash&debug host tools](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/flash_debug/host-tools.html). Pick your poison!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your mileage, however, will always vary according to the MCU that you're using, and there is no generic solution. Zephyr's official documentation also comes with a dedicated [section about debugging](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/debug/index.html), and a separate section about [flash & debug host tools](https://docs.zephyrproject.org/latest/develop/flash_debug/host-tools.html). Pick your poison!
```
